.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH RTRASH 1 "2026-07-06" "rtrash 0.1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
rtrash \- fast freedesktop.org trash tool with an rm-compatible interface
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B rtrash
[\fICOMMAND\fR] [\fIARGS\fR]...
.PP
.B rtrash
[\fIOPTION\fR]... [\fIFILE\fR]...
.PP
Multi-call names (symlinks to the same binary):
.BR trash-put ,
.BR trash ,
.BR trash-empty ,
.BR trash-list ,
.BR trash-restore ,
.BR trash-rm ,
and optionally
.B rm
(put into trash).
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B rtrash
implements the freedesktop.org Trash specification on Linux: home trash
(\fI$XDG_DATA_HOME/Trash\fR) and per-volume trash directories, with atomic
.B .trashinfo
files. It provides an rm-compatible put path and a trash-cli-style suite
(list, restore, empty, selective permanent delete).
.PP
Invoked as
.B rtrash
with a known subcommand, that command runs. Invoked as
.BR rtrash
with no subcommand (or as
.BR rm ,
.BR trash ,
or
.BR trash-put ),
arguments are treated as
.B put
(move into the trash). The multi-call name
.B trash-rm
is permanent delete of matching
.I trash entries
, not the same as multi-call
.B rm
(which puts).
.SH GLOBAL OPTIONS
When
.B rtrash
is invoked with no subcommand yet recognized:
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Display help and exit.
.TP
.BR \-V ", " \-\-version
Output version information and exit.
.SH COMMANDS
.SS put
.B rtrash put
[\fIOPTION\fR]... [\fIFILE\fR]...
.PP
Also:
.BR trash-put ,
.BR trash ,
.BR rm
(multi-call), or bare
.B rtrash
with paths/flags.
.PP
Move
.I FILE
s into the trash. Accepts common
.BR rm (1)
flags with the same interactive/force semantics; nothing is unlinked
permanently.
.TP
.BR \-f ", " \-\-force
Ignore nonexistent files and arguments, never prompt.
.TP
.B \-i
Prompt before every removal.
.TP
.B \-I
Prompt once before removing more than three files, or when removing
recursively.
.TP
.BI \-\-interactive [=WHEN]
Prompt according to
.IR WHEN :
.BR never ,
.BR once
(\-I), or
.BR always
(\-i); without
.IR WHEN ,
prompt always.
.TP
.BR \-r ", " \-R ", " \-\-recursive
Remove directories and their contents (into the trash).
.TP
.BR \-d ", " \-\-dir
Remove empty directories.
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-verbose
Explain what is being done.
.TP
.B \-\-one\-file\-system
Accepted for rm compatibility (no-op: entries are moved whole, never
traversed like
.BR "rm \-x" ).
.TP
.B \-\-preserve\-root
Do not remove
.RB \(oq / \(cq
(default).
.TP
.B \-\-no\-preserve\-root
Do not treat
.RB \(oq / \(cq
specially.
.TP
.B \-\-help
Display help and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-version
Output version information and exit.
.SS empty
.B rtrash empty
[\fIOPTION\fR]... [\fIDAYS\fR]
.PP
Also multi-call
.BR trash-empty .
.PP
Purge trashed items. With
.IR DAYS ,
only items trashed more than
.I DAYS
days ago.
.TP
.BR \-n ", " \-\-dry\-run
Report what would be removed without removing anything; also prints
approximate reclaimable disk space.
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-verbose
Print each removed item.
.TP
.BR \-f ", " \-\-force
Accepted for trash-cli compatibility (emptying never prompts).
.TP
.BI \-\-trash\-dir =PATH
Empty only this trash directory (repeatable); default is the home trash
plus every mounted volume.
.TP
.B \-\-home\-only
Only the home trash (skip volume trash discovery).
.TP
.B \-\-help
Display help and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-version
Output version information and exit.
.SS list
.B rtrash list
[\fIOPTION\fR]...
.PP
Also multi-call
.BR trash-list .
.PP
List trashed items as
.RB \(oq "DELETION-DATE ORIGINAL-PATH" \(cq,
oldest first.
.TP
.B \-\-home\-only
Only the home trash
(\fI$XDG_DATA_HOME/Trash\fR).
.TP
.BI \-\-trash\-dir =PATH
List only this trash directory (repeatable); default is the home trash
plus every mounted volume.
.TP
.BI \-\-older\-than =DAYS
Only items trashed more than
.I DAYS
days ago (same cutoff model as
.BR "empty DAYS" ).
.TP
.BI \-\-newer\-than =DAYS
Only items trashed within the last
.I DAYS
days.
.TP
.B \-\-json
Emit a JSON array of objects
(\fIdeletion_date\fR, \fIoriginal\fR, \fIname\fR, \fItrash_dir\fR).
.TP
.B \-\-help
Display help and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-version
Output version information and exit.
.SS status
.B rtrash status
[\fIOPTION\fR]...
.PP
Summarize discovered trash: item count and approximate reclaimable size
(per root and total). Uses the same disk-usage walk as
.BR "empty \-\-dry\-run" .
.TP
.B \-\-home\-only
Only the home trash
(\fI$XDG_DATA_HOME/Trash\fR).
.TP
.BI \-\-trash\-dir =PATH
Only this trash directory (repeatable).
.TP
.BI \-\-older\-than =DAYS
Only count items trashed more than
.I DAYS
days ago.
.TP
.BI \-\-newer\-than =DAYS
Only count items trashed within the last
.I DAYS
days.
.TP
.B \-\-json
Emit a JSON object
(\fIroots\fR, \fItotal_items\fR, \fItotal_bytes\fR).
.TP
.B \-\-help
Display help and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-version
Output version information and exit.
.SS restore
.B rtrash restore
[\fIOPTION\fR]... [\fIPATH\fR]
.PP
Also multi-call
.BR trash-restore .
.PP
Restore a trashed item to its original location. With
.IR PATH ,
restore the item originally at
.IR PATH
(exact original-path match).
Without
.IR PATH ,
on a TTY open the interactive restore browser (filter, navigate, restore);
without a TTY (or with
.BR \-\-plain )
print a numbered list and read an index from stdin.
Pass
.B \-\-cwd\-only
to limit bare restore to originals under the current directory.
A single match restores directly; multiple matches require a selection.
.TP
.BR \-f ", " \-\-force
Overwrite an existing file at the original location.
.TP
.B \-\-cwd\-only
Without PATH, only items trashed from under the current directory.
.TP
.B \-\-plain
Force numbered line selection even on a TTY (skip the TUI browser).
.TP
.B \-\-home\-only
Only the home trash (skip volume trash).
.TP
.BI \-\-trash\-dir =PATH
Only consider this trash directory (repeatable).
.TP
.B \-\-help
Display help and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-version
Output version information and exit.
.SS setup
.B rtrash setup
[\fIOPTION\fR]...
.PP
Install multi-call symlinks, bash/zsh completions, and this man page under a
user prefix (default
.IR ~/.local ,
or
.B $PREFIX
if set). Assets are
.B embedded in the binary
so a
.B cargo install
user does not need a source checkout. Preferred post-install step:
.BR "rtrash setup" .
.TP
.BI \-\-prefix =DIR
Install root (default:
.IR ~/.local ).
.TP
.BI \-\-bin\-dir =DIR
Override the directory for multi-call symlinks (default:
.IR PREFIX/bin ).
.TP
.B \-\-with\-rm
Also link
.B rm
→ rtrash (put into trash).
.TP
.BR \-n ", " \-\-dry\-run
Print actions without writing.
.TP
.BR \-f ", " \-\-force
Replace existing links/files (use after upgrades).
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-verbose
Print each path written.
.SS completions
.B rtrash completions
.RB { bash | zsh }
.PP
Print the embedded completion script to stdout (packagers / custom paths).
.SS man
.B rtrash man
.PP
Print the embedded man page source to stdout.
.SS rm (permanent delete from trash)
.B rtrash rm
[\fIOPTION\fR]...
.I PATTERN
...
.PP
Also multi-call
.BR trash-rm .
.PP
Permanently remove trashed items whose original path or basename matches
a
.I PATTERN
(shell-style glob; quote globs from the shell). Matching entries are
deleted from the trash
(\fBfiles/\fR and
.BR .trashinfo ),
not restored.
.PP
Note: multi-call name
.B rm
means
.I put into trash
(safe). This command (subcommand
.B rtrash rm
or multi-call
.BR trash-rm )
permanently deletes matching
.I trash
entries — not a synonym for put.
.TP
.BI \-\-trash\-dir =PATH
Only consider this trash directory (repeatable).
.TP
.B \-\-home\-only
Only the home trash (skip volume trash).
.TP
.BR \-n ", " \-\-dry\-run
List matches and reclaimable size; do not delete.
.TP
.BR \-f ", " \-\-force
Allow mass patterns that match everything (e.g.
.RB \(oq * \(cq).
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-verbose
Print each permanently removed original path.
.TP
.B \-\-help
Display help and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-version
Output version information and exit.
.PP
Examples:
.nf
.RS
rtrash rm \(aq*.o\(aq
rtrash rm \-n \(aq*.o\(aq
trash-rm foo
.RE
.fi
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B XDG_DATA_HOME
Base for the home trash directory
(\fI$XDG_DATA_HOME/Trash\fR). Defaults under
.I ~/.local/share
when unset.
.TP
.B HOME
Used when resolving the default data home.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I $XDG_DATA_HOME/Trash
Home trash:
.BR files/ ,
.BR info/ ,
.BR directorysizes ,
and optional lock file.
.TP
.IR $top /.Trash/ $uid
or
.IR $top /.Trash\- $uid
Per-volume trash on other mounts (see the Trash specification).
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
Failure (e.g. could not trash or purge an item).
.TP
.B 2
Usage error.
.PP
Put mode mirrors common
.BR rm (1)
exit conventions.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR rm (1),
Trash specification:
.UR https://specifications.freedesktop.org/trash-spec/trashspec-latest.html
.UE
.PP
Shell completions ship in the source tree under
.I completions/
(bash and zsh). See the project README for install paths.
.SH AUTHOR
Written for the rtrash project.
.SH COPYRIGHT
MIT License. See the LICENSE file in the distribution.
